[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger and today we're
going to look at Reflections in much the same way
as we talked about rotations in the last video
intuitively the idea of a reflection is pretty
simple we have a line say this line L and what
we mean by a reflection is we have a point on
one side and we're thinking of the mirror image on
the other side what does it mean well it means we
go perpendicularly towards the line and then
we go an equal amount to the other side so a
goes to a prime B say goes to B prime a little
circle like this goes to a little circle like
that and so on that's the reflection in the line
L that's a physical or geometrical description
now we want something a little bit more formal
the usual idea is to work in the functional note
ation that's common in modern mathematics where
we say that the reflection Sigma is a function
or map from the real plane to the real plane
and then there's some additional geometrical
description that specifies what kind of a function
it is we're not going to use that approach for a
number of very good reasons first of all we
have not yet defined the real numbers okay
secondly we do not believe in infinite sets
so we do not believe that the real plane is a
mathematical object that's properly defined and
thirdly the geometrical description we want to
replace it with something that's more concrete
and more algebraic so that even a computer can
understand what's going on even a computer with no
geometrical Intuition or no visual understanding
okay so how are we going to do that well the
idea is to simplify the issue by concentrating
on vectors rather than on points Reflections
act on vectors in a unique and well-defined
way and it turns out to be simpler to think about
what it does on vectors rather than what it does
on points so we have to turn our attention from
the grid plane that we've picturing here to the
vector plane where we're representing vectors so
here's our picture of the vector plane a position
in this Vector plane denotes not a point but a
vector so this position is encoding the vector
that's emanating from the origin to that position
so here we have the vector 1 Z here the vector 01
and we're looking at a particular reflection the
reflection in this red line here we're calling
that reflection Sigma we want to understand
precisely what this reflection does in order
to Define it okay so we're using our geometrical
intuition to get an algebraic formula and then
and then that algebraic formula is what we're
going to use to define what we actually mean
by the reflection this is all preliminary to
setting up the definition so let's suppose that
our reflection in this line sends the vector
1 Z to an arbitrary Vector AB a reflection is
going to maintain lengths or maintain quadran so
that new Vector is also going to lie on the unit
circle let's call that arbitrary point a B okay
so that Vector is going to go to a vector a b and
the other Vector 01 is going to go to a vector
like this which is going to be perpendicular to
the vector ab and it's going to be the vector B
minus a these two vectors are perpendicular and
now we can use that to describe what happens to a
general Vector say XY this particular Vector XY is
2 * 1 Z + 01 so its image under the reflection
can be obtained by taking 2 * this vector and
adding this Vector so we're going up here two
times and then adding there's the image X Prime
y Prime the reflection of the vector XY and so
in general we're just going to do the algebraic
version of that the vector 1 Z was sent to
the vector AB Vector 01 is sent to Vector B
minus a a general Vector XY can be written as
a combination x * 1 0 + y * 0 1 it's called a
linear combination of vectors and if we know where
1 0 goes and if we know where 01 goes then XY is
going to be sent to a new Vector X Prime y Prime
which is x * a + y * b - A these are the images
of these two vectors under this reflection we work
this out this is ax plus YB or b y there's the x
coordinate and the y coordinate is BX minus a y
right there it's very much like the formula for a
rotation that we saw in the last video except that
there's a plus sign here and a minus sign here and
in the previous one there was a minus sign here
and a plus sign here so now we can Define what
a reflection is a reflection is a symbol we use
Sigma the Greek letter Sigma and with a subscript
AB because it's specified or determined by that
Vector AB the image of 1 Z and we say that this
symbol interacts with the symbol for a vector
so XY times the symbol that combination is by
definition this what we've just obtained over here
it's the new Vector ax Plus b y BX - A Y so we're
defining this expression and how it interacts
with the expression for a vector to obtain a new
Vector that gives us a new mathematical object
called a vector reflection maybe VRE for short
and it's indexed or parameterized or labeled by a
vector AB which lies on the unit circle now just
as in our previous video I remind you that if
a vector AB lies on the unit circle then it's
either the special Vector minus 1 0 or it has this
expression in terms of a parameter T and we called
this vector v subt and I also remind you that in
the previous video we established this formula for
a rotation XY followed by the rotation index AB
was this particular combination okay so now it's
an interesting exercise to show that if you start
with a vector XY and you apply a reflection index
by this Vector VT you get another vector and then
you perform another reflection say in the vector
Vu where U is another parameter then the vector
that you're going to get can also be written as
as XY followed by the rotation indexed by v w in
other words exactly this kind of rotation up here
where the W depends on T and U by this formula
here w = uus t / 1 + T * U so the product of two
Reflections is a rotation we can just write
that like this so it's an excellent exercise
and there's a few things to be said about it
first of all it's a little bit different from
the corresponding result for rotations in that
this is no longer commutative if you interchange
U and T the order of U and T then this changes
just a little bit it changes because it's going
to be a minus sign introduced so it's not the same
if you or change the order of the reflections the
rotation you get is different another remark
to made is that there's a little bit of a
problem with this formula when T * U = -1 since
T and U are arbitrary rational numbers that can
happen and that means that there's some slight
difficulty that can occur with this formula and
that also happened in the previous video that
suggests that we haven't quite understood this
in the best or the right way and in fact we are
going to later on understand how to go beyond
this to a a better understanding but this is
a very good starting point for understanding
ing rotations and Reflections another point is
that we haven't yet connected the parameter a that
point or vector on the unit circle to the actual
line that we were reflecting in that's another
very interesting point that we'll that we'll
study that will lead us to many more uh important
understandings next time we are going to talk
about one of the traditional weakness of modern
mathematics that's closely related to the idea
of rotations and Reflections has to do with
the notion of angle which is actually very very
problematic historical difficulty in mathematics
I hope you're going to join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening [Music]